software-stack: Add lab README (#3)
open-education-hub/operating-systems: content/chapters/software-stack/lab/README.md

# Software Stack

- [Overview](content/overview.md)
- [Modern Software Stacks](content/modern-sw-stack.md)
- [Basic System Calls](content/basic-syscall.md)
- [System Call Wrapper](content/syscall-wrapper.md)
- [Common Functions](content/common-functions.md)
- [Libraries and libc](content/libc.md)

> - [Statically-linked and Dynamically-linked Libraries](content/static-dynamic.md)

Reviewer: Pana aici de citit

# Software Stack

Software comprises of code and data that is loaded in memory and used by the CPU.
Code means instructions that are to be fetched by the CPU, decoded and executed.
This is called **machine code**, i.e. binary instructions that are understood by the CPU.

So, when compared to hardware, **software is highly flexible**.
We can tie together specific instructions to handle a given task and run them on hardware (CPU, memory, I/O).
Different pieces of these instructions solve different tasks and run on the same hardware.
Moreover, these pieces of instructions can be duplicated and run on different pieces of hardware, thus providing **software reusability**.
All we are left with is creating those pieces of instructions, also called programs.

> The most direct way is to write programs in machine code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most direct way to write programs is in machine code.
```

Obviously, this is cumbersome, error prone and a mess to maintain, update and reuse.

The next step was to use assembly language.
Assembly language is a human-readable variant of machine code, that is more easily written.
Assembly language programs are assembled into machine code that is then loaded in memory and run on the CPU.
While this makes program writing easier, it still is difficult to maintain.

So higher-level programming languages were devised.
These programming languages provide a set of instructions that are closer to natural language.
This way, programs can be relatively easy written, providing **fast software development**.
Programs are compiled intro corresponding assembly language code, that is then assembled into machine code, that is then loaded in memory and run on the CPU.
Maintenance is simplified and other people can contribute to existing programs.
Another important feature of higher-level programming languages is **portability**: the same program can be compiled and assembled to run on different architectures.

In summary, software has intrinsic characteristics:
* flexibility: We can (easily) create new pieces of software.

>   Little is required, we don't need raw materials as in the case of hardware or housing or transportation.

Author: I disagree. It makes reading of Markdown text much easier.

* portability: This is the ability to build and run the same program on different computing platforms.
  This allows a developer to write the application code once and then run it everywhere.
* fast development: We want developers to be able to write code faster, using higher-level programming languages.

The last two characteristics rely on two items:
* higher-level programming languages: As discussed above, a compiler will take a higher-level program and transform it into binary code for different computing platforms, thus providing portability.
  Also, it's easier to read (comprehend) and write (develop) source code in a higher-level programming language, thus providing fast development.
* software stacks: A software stack is the layering of software such that each lower layer provides a set of features that the higher layer can directly use.
  This means that there is no need for the higher layer to reimplement those features;
  this provides fast development: focus on only the newer / required parts of software.

  Also, each lower layer provides a generic interface to the higher layer.

>   This generic interfaces "hides" possible differences in the even lower layers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  These generic interfaces "hide" possible differences in the even lower layers.
```

Most modern computing systems use a software stack such as the one in the figure below:

TODO: modern software stack

This modern software stack allows fast development and provides a rich set of applications to the user.

The basic software component is the **operating system** (OS) (technically the operating system **kernel**).
The OS provides the fundamental primitives to interact with hardware (read and write data) and to manage the running of applications (such as memory allocation, thread creation, scheduling).
These primitives form the **system call API** or **system API**.
An item in the system call API, i.e. the equivalent of a function call that triggers the execution of a functionality in the operating system, is a **system call**.

The system call API is well defined, stable and complete: it exposes the entire functionality of the operating system and hardware.
However, it is also minimalistic with respect to features and it provides a low-level (close to hardware) specification, making it cumbersome to use and **not portable**.

Due to the downsides of the system call API, a basic library, the **standard C library** (also called **libc**), is built on top of it.

> The standard C library wraps the system call APIs and provides an easier-to-use and partially portable interface.
> Because the system call API uses an OS-specific calling convention, the standard C library typically wraps each system call into an equivalent function call, following a portable calling convention.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The standard C library wraps each system call into an equivalent function call, following a portable calling convention.
```

Applications benefit from the larger set of libraries available on a system;
in other words, they employ **software reusability**.

In the rest of this chapter, we will analyze the software stack for different applications, we will build and run different types of applications and libraries and we will take a peek in the implementation of modern operating systems and low-level components.

## Analyzing the Software Stack

To get a better grasp on how the software stack works, let's do a bottom-up approach:
we build and run different programs, that start of by using the system call API (the lowest layer in the software stack) and progressively use higher layers.

### Basic System Calls

The `basic-syscall/` folder stores the implementation of a simple program in assembly language for the x86_64 (64 bit) architecture.
The program invokes two system calls: `write` and `exit`.
The program is duplicated in two files using the two x86 assembly language syntaxes: the Intel / NASM syntax (`hello.asm`) and the AT&T / GAS syntax (`hello.s`).

The implementation follows the [x86_64 Linux calling convention](https://x64.syscall.sh/):

> * system call ID is passed in the `rax` register

Author: Make sense, will do.

* system call arguments are passed, in order, in the `rdi`, `rsi`, `rdx`, `r10`, `r8`, `r9` registers

Let's build and run the two programs:

> ```Bash

Author: Then this should be done throughout all commands, to have uniformity. I removed it from all command line snippets.

If you get stuck, take a sneak peak at the solutions in the `solution/basic-syscall/` folder.

For debugging, use `strace` to trace the system calls from your program and make sure the arguments are set right.

1. Update the `hello.asm` and / or `hello.s` files to pause the execution of the program before the `exit` system call.

   You need to make the `sys_pause` system call, with no arguments.
   Find its ID [here](https://blog.rchapman.org/posts/Linux_System_Call_Table_for_x86_64/).

1. Update the `hello.asm` and / or `hello.s` files to read a message from standard input and print it to standard output.

   You'll need to define a buffer in the `data` or `bss` section.
   Use the `read` system call to read data in the buffer.
   The return value of `read` (placed in the `rax` register) is the number of bytes read.
   Use that value as the 3rd argument or `write`, i.e. the number of bytes printed.

   Find the ID of the `read` system call [here](https://x64.syscall.sh/).
   To find out more about its arguments, see [its man page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/read.2.html).
   Standard input descriptor is `0`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Read the content of a file in chunks of 128 bytes and print it to standard output.

   Alongside `read` and `write` system calls, you'll need to use `open` and `close`.
   Pay attention to the return code of each system call as it might indicate encountered errors.
```

Author: You don't need to use `open` and `close`. We're using standard file descriptors.

This modern software stack allows fast development and provides a rich set of applications to the user.

The basic software component is the **operating system** (OS) (technically the operating system **kernel**).
The OS provides the fundamental primitives to interact with hardware (read and write data) and to manage the running of applications (such as memory allocation, thread creation, scheduling).
These primitives form the **system call API** or **system API**.
An item in the system call API, i.e. the equivalent of a function call that triggers the execution of a functionality in the operating system, is a **system call**.

The system call API is well defined, stable and complete: it exposes the entire functionality of the operating system and hardware.
However, it is also minimalistic with respect to features and it provides a low-level (close to hardware) specification, making it cumbersome to use and **not portable**.

Due to the downsides of the system call API, a basic library, the **standard C library** (also called **libc**), is built on top of it.
The standard C library wraps each system call into an equivalent function call, following a portable calling convention.

> Because the system call API uses an OS-specific calling convention, the standard C library typically wraps each system call into an equivalent function call, following a portable calling convention.

Reviewer 3: These sentences are almost duplicates. You can remove the first one.

> More than these wraps, the standard C library provides its own API that is typically portable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
More than these wrappers, the standard C library provides its own API that is typically portable.
```
You don't state the reasons why libc adds functionality on top of the syscall wrappers clearly:
- syscalls don't provide enough functionality: `str*`, `prinft` vs `write` etc.
- using syscalls isn't optimal (hint at user space buffering, on which you expand later)
I think you can just list the disadvantageds of syscalls here and then go over them in greater detail later in the lab.

Part of the API exposed by the standard C library is the **standard C API**, also called **ANSI C** or **ISO C**;
this API is typically portable across all platforms (operating systems and hardware).
Despite its name, the standard C library provides APIs that may not be standard, but particular to the underlying operating systems, such as system call wrapper functions.

The existence of the standard C library is reliant on the C programming language, a very simple programming language and very close to the low-level view of the memory.
Because of this, most higher-level and more feature rich programming languages rely on the C library.

> Each programming language typically provides a standard library of its own together with a runtime library, both of which rely on the C library.

Reviewer 3: You can easily use D as an example of this. Not a demo, just a few sentences that D executables also link libc so the language doesn't have to reinvent the wheel. I'm not sure if this is needed though.

The standard C library is used to develop programs in the respective programming language.
Conversely, the runtime library is transparent to the user and is used during runtime to provide the features required (such as exception handling, bounds checking, garbage collection etc.).

> Other topic-specific libraries (image processing, encryption, compression, regular expression handling etc.) are then built on top of the standard C library and / or specific programming language libraries.

Reviewer 3: It is now obvious how this is done. You can use `numpy`, which is implemented in C, as an example. You can use its [core math layer](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/tree/main/numpy/core/src/npymath). The code isn't too readable but this is one of the costs of performance, which you can also add in this lab.

Author: I didn't get this. What is the actual suggestion? Creating a demo?

Reviewer 3: Yes. It's easy to say this from a high-level perspective, but I think a hands-on example is needed to truly understand what this is about.

## Analyzing the Software Stack

To get a better grasp on how the software stack works, let's do a bottom-up approach:
we build and run different programs, that start of by using the system call API (the lowest layer in the software stack) and progressively use higher layers.

### Basic System Calls

The `support/basic-syscall/` folder stores the implementation of a simple program in assembly language for the x86_64 (64 bit) architecture.
The program invokes two system calls: `write` and `exit`.
The program is duplicated in two files using the two x86 assembly language syntaxes: the Intel / NASM syntax (`hello.asm`) and the AT&T / GAS syntax (`hello.s`).

The implementation follows the [x86_64 Linux calling convention](https://x64.syscall.sh/):
* system call ID is passed in the `rax` register
* system call arguments are passed, in order, in the `rdi`, `rsi`, `rdx`, `r10`, `r8`, `r9` registers

Let's build and run the two programs:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/basic-syscall$ ls
hello.asm  hello.s  Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/basic-syscall$ make
nasm -f elf64 -o hello-nasm.o hello.asm
cc -nostdlib -no-pie -Wl,--entry=main -Wl,--build-id=none  hello-nasm.o   -o hello-nasm
gcc -c -o hello-gas.o hello.s
cc -nostdlib -no-pie -Wl,--entry=main -Wl,--build-id=none  hello-gas.o   -o hello-gas

student@os:~/.../lab/support/basic-syscall$ ls
hello.asm  hello-gas  hello-gas.o  hello-nasm  hello-nasm.o  hello.s  Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/basic-syscall$ ./hello-nasm
Hello, world!
student@os:~/.../lab/support/basic-syscall$ ./hello-gas
Hello, world!
```

The two programs end up printing the `Hello, world!` message at standard output by issuing the `write` system call.
Then they complete their work by issuing the `exit` system call.
Use `man 2 write` and `man 3 exit` to get a detailed understanding of the syntax and use of the two system calls.
You can also check the [online man pages](): [`write`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/write.2.html), [`exit`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/exit.3.html)

We use `strace` to inspect system calls issued by a program:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

This means adding another `write` system call.

TODO: Quiz

### System Call Wrappers

The `support/syscall-wrapper/` folder stores the implementation of a simple program written in C (`main.c`) that calls the `write()` and `exit()` functions.
The functions are defined in `syscall.asm` as wrappers around corresponding system calls.
Each function invokes the corresponding system call using the specific system call ID and the arguments provided for the function call.

The implementation of the two wrapper functions in `syscall.asm` is very simple, as the function arguments are passed in the same registers required by the system call.
This is because of the overlap of the first three registers for the [x86_64 Linux function calling convention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86_calling_conventions#System_V_AMD64_ABI) and the [x86_64 Linux system call convention](https://x64.syscall.sh/).

`syscall.h` contains the declaration of the two functions and it's included in `main.c`.
This way, C programs can be written that make function calls that end up making system calls.

Let's build, run and trace system calls for the program:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

By using wrapper calls, we are able to write our programs in C.
However, we still need to implement common functions for string management, working with I/O, working with memory.

The simple attempt is to implement these functions (`printf()` or `strcpy()` or `malloc()`) once in a C source code file and then reuse them when needed.
This saves us time (we don't have to reimplement) and allows us to constantly improve one implementation constantly;
there will only be one implementation that we update to increase its safety, efficiency or performance.

The `support/common-functions/` folder stores the implementation of string management functions, in `string.c` and `string.h` and of printing functions in `printf.c` and `printf.h`.
The `printf` implementation is [this one](https://github.com/mpaland/printf).

There are two programs: `main_string.c` showcases string management functions, `main_printf.c` showcases the `printf()` function.

`main_string.c` depends on the `string.h` and `string.c` files that implement the `strlen()` and `strcpy()` functions.
We print messages using the `write()` system call wrapper implemented in `syscall.s`

Let's build and run the program:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/common-functions$ ./main_string
Destination string is: warhammer40k

student@os:~/.../lab/support/common-functions$ strace ./main_string
execve("./main_string", ["./main_string"], 0x7ffd544d0a70 /* 63 vars */) = 0
write(1, "Destination string is: ", 23Destination string is: ) = 23
write(1, "warhammer40k\n", 13warhammer40k
)          = 13
exit(0)                                 = ?
+++ exited with 0 +++
```

When using `strace` we see that only the `write()` system call wrapper triggers a system call.
There are no system calls triggered by `strlen()` and `strcpy()` as can be seen in their implementation.

In addition, `main_printf.c` depends on the `printf.h` and `printf.c` files that implement the `printf()` function.
There is a requirement to implement the `_putchar()` function;
we implement it in the `main_printf.c` file using the `write()` syscall call wrapper.
The `main()` function `main_printf.c` file contains all the string and printing calls.
`printf()` offers a more powerful printing interface, allowing us to print addresses and integers.

Let's build and run the program:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

We create a program, we compile and then we link it against the library for all the features it provides.

The most important library in modern operating systems is the **standard C library**, also called **libc**.
This is the library providing system call wrappers and basic functionality for input-output, string management, memory management.
By default, a program is always linked with the standard C library.
In the examples above we've explicitly disabled the use of the standard C library with the help of the `-nostdlib` linker option.

By using the standard C library, it's much easier to create new programs.
You call existing functionality in the library and implement only features particular to your program.

The `support/libc/` folder stores the implementation of programs using the standard C library: `hello.c`, `main_string.c` and `main_printf.c`.
These programs are almost identical to those used in the past sections:

* `hello.c` is similar to the programs in `solution/basic-syscall/` and `solution/syscall-wrapper/`
* `main_string.c` and `main_printf.c` are similar to the programs in `solution/common-functions/`

Let's build and run them:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

rm -f hello hello.o
rm -f main_printf main_printf.o
rm -f main_string main_string.o

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ls
hello.c  main_printf.c  main_string.c  Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ make
cc -Wall   -c -o hello.o hello.c
cc -static  hello.o   -o hello
cc -Wall   -c -o main_printf.o main_printf.c
cc -static  main_printf.o   -o main_printf
cc -Wall   -c -o main_string.o main_string.c
cc -static  main_string.o   -o main_string

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ls
hello  hello.c  hello.o  main_printf  main_printf.c  main_printf.o  main_string  main_string.c  main_string.o  Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ./hello
Hello, world!
Bye, world!
aaa
aaa
^C

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ./main_string
Destination string is: warhammer40k

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ./main_printf
[before] src is at 0x492308, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
[before] dest is at 0x6bb340, len is 0, content: ""
copying src to dest
[after] src is at 0x492308, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
[after] dest is at 0x6bb340, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
abc
```

The behavior / output is similar to the ones in the previous sections:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ../../solution/basic-syscall/hello-nasm
Hello, world!
Bye, world!
aaa
aaa
^C

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ../../solution/common-functions/main_string
Destination string is: warhammer40k

student@os:~/.../lab/support/libc$ ../../solution/common-functions/main_printf
[before] src is at 0000000000402680, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
[before] dest is at 0000000000604000, len is 0, content: ""
copying src to dest
[after] src is at 0000000000402680, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
[after] dest is at 0000000000604000, len is 12, content: "warhammer40k"
abc
```

We can inspect the system calls made to check the similarities.
For example, for the `main_printf` program we get the outputs:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

That is, the calling convention and data structure layout must match.
These form the **ABI** (*Application Binary Interface*).

It is usually the job of the compiler and linker to ensure that two different pieces of binary software that are run together share the same ABI.
ABI compatibility is required both when linking together a library and a program and when running a program on top of a given operating system.
In the latter case, registers and memory area must be filled correctly by the program as expected by the operating system.

TODO: diagram with API + ABI (media/api-abi.svg)

### Statically-linked and Dynamically-linked Libraries

Libraries can be statically-linked or dynamically-linked, creating statically-linked executables and dynamically-linked executables.
Typically, the executables found in modern operating systems are dynamically-linked, given their reduced size and ability to share libraries at runtime.

The `support/static-dynamic/` folder stores the implementation of a simple "Hello, World!"-printing program that uses both static and dynamic linking of libraries.
Let's build and run the two executables:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ls
hello.c  Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ make
cc -Wall   -c -o hello.o hello.c
cc   hello.o   -o hello
cc -static -o hello_static hello.o

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ls -lh
total 852K
-rwxrwxr-x 1 razvan razvan 8.2K Aug  2 15:53 hello
-rw-rw-r-- 1 razvan razvan   76 Aug  2 15:51 hello.c
-rw-rw-r-- 1 razvan razvan 1.6K Aug  2 15:53 hello.o
-rwxrwxr-x 1 razvan razvan 827K Aug  2 15:53 hello_static
-rw-rw-r-- 1 razvan razvan  237 Aug  2 15:53 Makefile

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ./hello
Hello, World!

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ./hello_static
Hello, World!
```

The two executables (`hello` and `hello_static`) behave similarly, despite having vastly different sizes (`8.2K` vs. `827K` - 100 times larger).

We use `nm` and `ldd` to catch differences between the two types of resulting executables:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ldd hello
        linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007ffc8d9b2000)
        libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007f10d1d88000)
        /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (0x00007f10d237b000)

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ ldd hello_static
        not a dynamic executable

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ nm hello | wc -l
33

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ nm hello_static | wc -l
1674
```

The dynamic executable references the dyamically-linked libc library (`/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6`), whil the statically-linked executable has no references.
Also, given the statically-linked executable integrated entire parts of statically-linked libraries, there are many more symbols than in the case of a dynamically-linked executable (`1674` vs. `33`).

We can use `strace` to see that there are differences in the preparatory system calls for each type of executables.
For the dynamically-linked executable, the dynamically-linked library (`/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6`) is opened during runtime:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

brk(0x55a72edc7000)                     = 0x55a72edc7000
write(1, "Hello, World!\n", 14Hello, World!
)         = 14
exit_group(0)                           = ?
+++ exited with 0 +++

student@os:~/.../lab/support/static-dynamic$ strace ./hello_static
execve("./hello_static", ["./hello_static"], 0x7ffc9fd45400 /* 66 vars */) = 0
brk(NULL)                               = 0xff8000
brk(0xff91c0)                           = 0xff91c0
arch_prctl(ARCH_SET_FS, 0xff8880)       = 0
uname({sysname="Linux", nodename="yggdrasil", ...}) = 0
readlink("/proc/self/exe", "/home/razvan/school/so/operating"..., 4096) = 116
brk(0x101a1c0)                          = 0x101a1c0
brk(0x101b000)                          = 0x101b000
access("/etc/ld.so.nohwcap", F_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
fstat(1, {st_mode=S_IFCHR|0620, st_rdev=makedev(136, 18), ...}) = 0
write(1, "Hello, World!\n", 14Hello, World!
)         = 14
exit_group(0)                           = ?
+++ exited with 0 +++
```

Similarly, we can investigate a system executable (`/bin/ls`) to see that indeed all referenced dynamically-linked libraries are opened (via the `openat` system call) at runtime:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

openat(AT_FDCWD, "/proc/filesystems", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/locale/locale-archive", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, ".", O_RDONLY|O_NONBLOCK|O_CLOEXEC|O_DIRECTORY) = 3
community  docs  _index.html  search.md
+++ exited with 0 +++
```

- no practice

TODO: Quiz

### Library calls vs system calls

The standard C library has primarily two uses:

1. wrapping system calls into easier to use C-style library calls, such as `open()`, `write()`, `read()`
1. adding common functionality required for our program, such as string management (`strcpy`), memory management (`malloc()`) or formatted I/O (`printf()`)

The first use means a 1-to-1 mapping between library calls and system calls: one library call means one system call.
The second group doesn't have a standard mapping.
A library call could be mapped to no system calls, one system call, two or more system calls or it may depend (a system call may or may not happen).

The `support/libcall-syscall/` folder stores the implementation of a simple program that makes different library calls.
Let's build the program and then trace the library calls (with `ltrace`) and the system calls (with `strace`):

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

Actual system calls are made either when the standard C library buffer is full or when an `fflush()` library call is made.

#### Practice

Enter the `support/libcall-syscall/` folder and go through the practice items below.

1. Check library calls and system calls for the `call2.c` file.
   Use `ltrace` and `strace`.

   Find explanations for the calls being made and the library call to system call mapping.

TODO: Quiz

### High-Level Languages

Using the standard C library (libc) frees the programmer from the cumbersome steps of invoking system calls and reimplementing commun features.
Still, for improved development time and safety, other programming languages can be used, such as Rust, Python, JavaScript.
Most (if not all) of these high-level programming languages still make use of the standard C library.
Such that a call to a function in Python would end-up making a call to a function in the standard C library.

The `support/high-level-lang/` folder stores the implementation of a simple "Hello, World!"-printing program in Python.
We simply invoke the `python` interpreter to run the program:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ python hello.py
Hello, world!
```

We count the number of functions called from the standard C library and the number of system calls:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ ltrace -l 'libc*' python hello.py 2> libc.out
Hello, world!

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ wc -l libc.out
50469 out

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ strace python hello.py 2> syscall.out
Hello, world!

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ wc -l syscall.out
948 syscall.out
```

The dynamic standard C library (`libc.so.6`) is a dependency of the Python interpreter (`/usr/bin/python3`):

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ ldd /usr/bin/python3
[...]
        libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007fa6fd6d0000)
[...]
```

We can see the complexity of invoking the Python interpreter, resulting in more the 50,000 of library calls being made.
This means added overhead versus a simple C function.
However this also means faster development in the Python programming language.
Each new layer in the software stack simplifies development but adds overhead.

We can use `perf` to compare the running time between the Python and a C "Hello, World!"-printing programs:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```console
```

           141,710      branches                  #  310.393 M/sec
             6,208      branch-misses             #    4.38% of all branches

       0.000816974 seconds time elapsed

       0.000872000 seconds user
       0.000000000 seconds sys

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ sudo perf stat python hello.py
Hello, world!

 Performance counter stats for 'python hello.py':

             69.39 msec task-clock                #    0.992 CPUs utilized
                 2      context-switches          #    0.029 K/sec
                 0      cpu-migrations            #    0.000 K/sec
             1,115      page-faults               #    0.016 M/sec
        74,405,125      cycles                    #    1.072 GHz
        84,957,056      instructions              #    1.14  insn per cycle
        18,574,724      branches                  #  267.689 M/sec
           759,104      branch-misses             #    4.09% of all branches

       0.069981351 seconds time elapsed

       0.054376000 seconds user
       0.015536000 seconds sys
```

We can see that on all metrics, the running of the Python program is less efficient than the running of the C program.

> `69` milliseconds are used by Python whereas less than `1` millisecond for the C program.

Reviewer 2: Is this on purpose?

We can see that it's easier to have wrapper calls and write most of the code in C than in assembly language.

TODO: Quiz

### Common Functions

By using wrapper calls, we are able to write our programs in C.
However, we still need to implement common functions for string management, working with I/O, working with memory.

The simple attempt is to implement these functions and then reuse the implementation each time we require them.
So we would implement `printf()` or `strcpy()` or `malloc()` once in a C source code file, and reuse them.
This saves us time (we don't have to reimplement) and gives us the opportunity to constantly improve one implementation and then reuse the implementation;
there will only be one implementation that we update to increase its safety, efficiency or performance.

The `support/common-functions/` folder stores the implementation of string management functions, in `string.c` and `string.h` and of printing functions in `printf.c` and `printf.h`.
The `printf` implementation is [this one](https://github.com/mpaland/printf).

There are two programs: `main_string.c` showcases string management functions, `main_printf.c` also showcases the `printf()` function.

> `main_string.c` depends on the `string.h` and `string.c` files that implement the `strlen()` and `strcpy()` functions.
> In the `main_string.c` file we call `strlen()` and `strcpy()`;
> these functions are implemented in `string.c`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`main_string.c` depends on the `string.h` and `string.c` files that implement the `strlen()` and `strcpy()` functions.
```
The explanation is repetitive.

```

We count the number of functions called from the standard C library and the number of system calls:

```
student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ ltrace -l 'libc*' python hello.py 2> libc.out
Hello, world!

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ wc -l libc.out
50469 out

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ strace python hello.py 2> syscall.out
Hello, world!

student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ wc -l syscall.out
948 syscall.out
```

The dynamic standard C library (`libc.so.6`) is a dependency of the Python interpreter (`/usr/bin/python3`):

```
student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ ldd /usr/bin/python3
[...]
        libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007fa6fd6d0000)
[...]
```

We can see the complexity of invoking the Python interpreter, resulting in more the 50,000 of library calls being made.
This means added overhead versus a simple C function.
However this also means faster development in the Python programming language.
Each new layer in the software stack simplifies development but adds overhead.

We can use `perf` to compare the running time between the Python and a C "Hello, World!"-printing programs:

```

> student@os:~/.../lab/support/high-level-lang$ sudo perf stat ../static-dynamic/hello

Reviewer 3: If we provide students with virtualised environments (VMs / containers), `perf` might not run or run inconsistently. It would be nice to showcase `perf` as well but if virtualisation  hurts us, we can skip it as it only underlines the previous argument.

Author: Makes sense. I think `perf` should still run OK on virtualized environments. And it is a tool we could use for other demos as well.

That said, I'm open to alternatives.

`69` milliseconds are used by Python whereas less than `1` millisecond for the C program.

When deciding what programming language and what libraries and software components to use, you have to balance requirements for fast development and increased safety (inherent to higher-level programming languages) with requirements for speed of efficiency (common to lower-level programming languages such as C).
Newer modern programming languages such as Go, Rust, D aim to add the benefits of high-level programming languages and keep efficiency close to the C programming language.
Generally, additional software layers (libraries, language environments, interpreters) simplify development but decrease speed and efficiency.

#### Practice

Enter the `support/high-level-lang/` folder and go through the practice items below.

1. Use `make` to create the `hello` executable from the `hello.go` file (a Go "Hello, World!"-printing program).
   Use `ltrace` and `strace` to compute the number of library calls and system calls.
   Use `perf` to measure the running time.

   Compare the values with those from the "Hello, World!"-printing programs in C and Python.

> 2. Create a "Hello, World!"-printing program in a program language of your choice (other than C, Python and Go).

Reviewer 3: And if using C++, use `cout`, not `printf`.

Reviewer 3: You're right.

1. Inside the `vendetta.c` file make a call to `sin()` function (for sine).
   Compute `sin(0)` and `sin(PI/2)`.

### High-Level Languages

Enter the `support/high-level-lang/` folder and go through the practice items below.
If you get stuck, take a sneak peak at the solutions in the `solution/high-level-lang/` folder.

> 1. Create programs in C, Python and Go that computes the N-th Fibonacci number.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create programs in C, Python and Go that compute the N-th Fibonacci number.
```

   `N` is passed as a command-line argument.

   Use `ltrace` and `strace` to compute the number of library calls and system calls.
   Use `perf` to measure the running time.

   Compare the values of the three programs.

> 1. Create programs in C, Python and Go that copies a source file into a destination file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create programs in C, Python and Go that copy a source file to a destination file.
```

   Both files are passed as the two command-line arguments for the program.
   Sample run:

   ```
   $ cp src dest
   ```

   Use `ltrace` and `strace` to compute the number of library calls and system calls.
   Use `perf` to measure the running time.
   Use source files of different sizes.

>    Compare the values of the three programs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Compare the outputs of these commands on the three programs.
```
Values was too vague.
